gedi-subset/README.md, before:

# GEDI Subsetting

- [Algorithm Outline](#algorithm-outline)
- [Algorithm Inputs](#algorithm-inputs)
- [Running a GEDI Subsetting DPS Job](#running-a-gedi-subsetting-dps-job)
- [Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary](#getting-the-geojson-url-for-a-geoboundary)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
  - [Repository Setup](#repository-setup)
  - [Creating an Algorithm Release](#creating-an-algorithm-release)
  - [Registering an Algorithm Release](#registering-an-algorithm-release)
- [Citations](#citations)

## Algorithm Outline

At a high level, the GEDI subsetting algorithm does the following:

- Queries the MAAP CMR for GEDI L4A granules intersecting a specified AOI
  (GeoJSON)
- Downloads the data file (h5) for each intersecting granule (up to specified limit)
- Subsets each data file
- Combines all subset files into a single output file named `gedi_subset.gpkg`,
  in GeoPackage format, which readable with `geopandas` as a `GeoDataFrame`.

## Algorithm Inputs

To run a GEDI subsetting DPS job, you must supply the following inputs:

- `aoi`: URL to a GeoJSON file representing your area of interest
- `limit`: Maximum number of GEDI granule data files to download (among those
  that intersect the specified AOI)

If your AOI is a publicly available geoBoundary, see
[Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary](#getting-the-geojson-url-for-a-geoboundary)
for details on obtaining it's URL.  In this case, that is the URL you must
supply for the `aoi` input.

Alternatively, you can make your own GeoJSON file for your AOI and place it
within your public bucket within the ADE.  Based upon where you place your
GeoJSON file, you can construct a URL to specify for the a job's `aoi` input.

Specifically, by placing your GeoJSON file at the following location within the
ADE:

```plain
~/my-public-bucket/path/to/aoi.geojson
```

you would then supply the following URL as the `aoi` input value when running
this algorithm as a DPS job, where `<USERNAME>` is your ADE username:

```plain
https://maap-ops-workspace.s3.amazonaws.com/shared/<USERNAME>/path/to/aoi.geojson
```

## Running a GEDI Subsetting DPS Job

The GEDI Subsetting DPS Job is named `gedi-subset_ubuntu`, and may be executed
from your ADE Workspace by opening the **DPS/MAS Operations** menu, choosing
the **Execute DPS Job** menu option, and selecting `gedi-subset_ubuntu:<VERSION>`
from the dropdown.  You will be prompted for the inputs as described in the
previous section.

Alternatively, for greater control of your job configuration, you may use the
MAAP API from a Notebook (or a Python script), as follows:

```python
import uuid

from maap.maap import MAAP

maap = MAAP(maap_host='api.ops.maap-project.org')
aoi = "<AOI GeoJSON URL>"  # See previous section
limit = 2000  # Maximum number of granule files to download

result = maap.submitJob(
    identifier="<DESCRIPTION>",
    algo_id="gedi-subset_ubuntu",
    version="<VERSION>",
    queue="maap-dps-worker-8gb",
    username="<USERNAME>",  # Your Earthdata Login username
    aoi=aoi,
    limit=limit,
)

print(result["job_id"])
```

Using the value of `result["job_id"]`, you may use the **DPS/MAS Operations**
menu for job operations, just as if you had submitted the job from the menu
(rather than programmatically).  Once the job status is **Succeeded**, you must
obtain the jobs result (**Get DPS Job Result**), which should display 3 URLs,
with the first URL of the following form:

```plain
http://.../<USERNAME>/dps_output/gedi-subset_ubuntu/<VERSION>/<DATETIME_PATH>
```

Based upon this URL, the `gedi_subset.gpkg` file generated by the job should be
available at the following path within the ADE:

```plain
~/my-private-bucket/dps_output/gedi-subset_ubuntu/<VERSION>/<DATETIME_PATH>/gedi_subset.gpkg
```

## Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary

If your AOI is a geoBoundary (such as a country), you may obtain the URL for its
GeoJSON file from the [geoBoundaries] website, rather than constructing a custom
GeoJSON file.  To obtain the URL for the GeoJSON of an AOI, obtain the ISO3 code
and level for the AOI's geoBoundary from the website.

Once you know the ISO3 code and level, construct a [geoBoundaries API] URL
(this is _not_ the GeoJSON URL) of the following form, replacing `<ISO3>` and
`<LEVEL>` with appropriate values:

```plain
https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/<ISO3>/<LEVEL>/
```

For example, the ISO3 code for Gabon is GAB.  Therefore, the geoBoundaries API
URL for Gabon level 0 is
<https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/>.

You may use the geoBoundaries API URL in various ways to obtain your AOI's
GeoJSON URL, such as one of the following:

- Use a browser to navigate to the API URL.  If your browser directly displays
  the result, locate the value of `"gjDownloadURL"`.  If your browser forces
  you to download the result, do so, and locate the value of `"gjDownloadURL"`
  within the downloaded file.  In either case, the value associated with
  `"gjDownloadURL"` is your AOI's GeoJSON URL.

- Alternatively, open a terminal window and run the following command,
  replacing `<API_URL>` appropriately.  The output should be the GeoJSON URL:

  ```sh
  curl -s <API_URL> | tr ',' '\n' | grep "gjDownloadURL.*gbOpen" | sed -E 's/.*"(https.+)"/\1/'
  ```

Continuing with the Gabon example, entering the geoBoundaries API URL for Gabon
(shown above) in a browser should result in the following (abridged) output
(either in the browser, or within a downloaded file):

```plain
{
  "boundaryID": "GAB-ADM0-25889322",
  "boundaryName": "Gabon",
  "boundaryISO": "GAB",
  ...
  "gjDownloadURL": "https://github.com/wmgeolab/geoBoundaries/raw/9f8c9e0f3aa13c5d07efaf10a829e3be024973fa/releaseData/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/geoBoundaries-GAB-ADM0.geojson",
  ...
  "gbHumanitarian": {
    ...
  }
}
```

Alternatively, using `curl` from the terminal should also yield the same GeoJSON URL:

```bash
$ curl -s https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/ | tr ',' '\n' | grep "gjDownloadURL.*gbOpen" | sed -E 's/.*"(https.+)"/\1/'
https://github.com/wmgeolab/geoBoundaries/raw/9f8c9e0f3aa13c5d07efaf10a829e3be024973fa/releaseData/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/geoBoundaries-GAB-ADM0.geojson
```

You may use this GeoJSON URL for the `aoi` input when running the GEDI
subsetting DPS job.

## Contributing

### Repository Setup

To contribute to this work, you must obtain access to the following:

1. [MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitHub]: For creating new versions
   (releases) of the algorithms implemented in the repository.
1. [MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitLab]: A copy of the GitHub
   repository, in order to enable registering new versions of the algorithms
   from within the ADE (which currently only supports GitLab repositories).
1. [NASA MAAP]: Where the ADE resides, and thus where algorithms can be
   registered (from GitLab repositories).

To prepare for contributing, do the following in an ADE workspace:

1. Clone the GitHub repository
1. Add the GitLab repository as another remote (named `ade` here, but you may
   specify a different name for the remote):

   ```bash
   git remote add --tags -f ade https://repo.ops.maap-project.org/data-team/maap-documentation-examples.git
   ```

If you plan to do any development work outside of the ADE (such as on your
local workstation), perform the steps above in that location as well.

During development, you will create PRs against the GitHub repository, as
explained below.

### Creating an Algorithm Release

1. Create a new branch based on an appropriate existing branch (typically based
   on `main`).
1. In addition to your desired code and/or configuration changes, do the
   following:
   1. Update `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yaml` according to the
      versioning convention referenced in the [Changelog](./CHANGELOG.md).
   1. Add appropriate entries to the [Changelog](./CHANGELOG.md), according to
      the Changelog convention referenced in the file.  In particular, you
      should add a new section using the same version as specified in
      `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yaml`, with appropriate subsections.
1. Submit a PR to the GitHub repository.
1. _Only when_ the PR is on a branch to be merged into the `main` branch _and_
   it has been approved and merged, create a new release in GitHub as follows:
   1. Go to
      <https://github.com/MAAP-Project/maap-documentation-examples/releases/new>
   1. Click the **Choose a tag** dropdown.
   1. In the input box that appears, enter the _same_ value as the new value of
      `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yml`, and click the **Create a
      new tag** label that appears immediately below the input box.
   1. In the **Release title** input, also enter the _same_ value as the new
      value of `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yml`.
   1. In the description text box, copy and paste from the Changelog file only
      the _new version section_ you added earlier to the Changelog.
   1. Click the **Publish release** button.

### Registering an Algorithm Release

Once a release is published in the GitHub repository (see above), the code from
the GitHub repository must be pushed to the GitLab repository in order to be
able to register the new version of the algorithm, as follows, within the ADE:

1. Pull the latest code from GitHub (to obtain merged PR, if necessary):

   ```bash
   git pull origin
   ```

1. Push the latest code to GitLab (replace `ade` with the appropriate remote
   name, if you didn't use `ade` earlier):

   ```bash
   git push --all ade
   ```

1. From the menu **DPS/MAS Operations**, choose **Publish Algorithm**.
1. Choose `gedi-subset_ubuntu:main` and click **Ok**.

## Citations

Country Boundaries from:

Runfola, D. et al. (2020) geoBoundaries: A global database of political administrative boundaries. PLoS ONE 15(4): e0231866. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231866>

[geoBoundaries]:
  https://www.geoboundaries.org
[geoBoundaries API]:
  https://www.geoboundaries.org/api.html
[MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitHub]:
  https://github.com/MAAP-Project/maap-documentation-examples.git
[MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitLab]:
  https://repo.ops.maap-project.org/data-team/maap-documentation-examples.git
[NASA MAAP]:
  https://ops.maap-project.org/

Commit message:

Finish documenting steps to register algorithm

gedi-subset/README.md, after:

# GEDI Subsetting

- [Algorithm Outline](#algorithm-outline)
- [Algorithm Inputs](#algorithm-inputs)
- [Running a GEDI Subsetting DPS Job](#running-a-gedi-subsetting-dps-job)
- [Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary](#getting-the-geojson-url-for-a-geoboundary)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
  - [Repository Setup](#repository-setup)
  - [Creating an Algorithm Release](#creating-an-algorithm-release)
  - [Registering an Algorithm Release](#registering-an-algorithm-release)
- [Citations](#citations)

## Algorithm Outline

At a high level, the GEDI subsetting algorithm does the following:

- Queries the MAAP CMR for GEDI L4A granules intersecting a specified AOI
  (GeoJSON)
- Downloads the data file (h5) for each intersecting granule (up to specified limit)
- Subsets each data file
- Combines all subset files into a single output file named `gedi_subset.gpkg`,
  in GeoPackage format, which readable with `geopandas` as a `GeoDataFrame`.

## Algorithm Inputs

To run a GEDI subsetting DPS job, you must supply the following inputs:

- `aoi`: URL to a GeoJSON file representing your area of interest
- `limit`: Maximum number of GEDI granule data files to download (among those
  that intersect the specified AOI)

If your AOI is a publicly available geoBoundary, see
[Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary](#getting-the-geojson-url-for-a-geoboundary)
for details on obtaining it's URL.  In this case, that is the URL you must
supply for the `aoi` input.

Alternatively, you can make your own GeoJSON file for your AOI and place it
within your public bucket within the ADE.  Based upon where you place your
GeoJSON file, you can construct a URL to specify for the a job's `aoi` input.

Specifically, by placing your GeoJSON file at the following location within the
ADE:

```plain
~/my-public-bucket/path/to/aoi.geojson
```

you would then supply the following URL as the `aoi` input value when running
this algorithm as a DPS job, where `<USERNAME>` is your ADE username:

```plain
https://maap-ops-workspace.s3.amazonaws.com/shared/<USERNAME>/path/to/aoi.geojson
```

## Running a GEDI Subsetting DPS Job

The GEDI Subsetting DPS Job is named `gedi-subset_ubuntu`, and may be executed
from your ADE Workspace by opening the **DPS/MAS Operations** menu, choosing
the **Execute DPS Job** menu option, and selecting `gedi-subset_ubuntu:<VERSION>`
from the dropdown.  You will be prompted for the inputs as described in the
previous section.

Alternatively, for greater control of your job configuration, you may use the
MAAP API from a Notebook (or a Python script), as follows:

```python
import uuid

from maap.maap import MAAP

maap = MAAP(maap_host='api.ops.maap-project.org')
aoi = "<AOI GeoJSON URL>"  # See previous section
limit = 2000  # Maximum number of granule files to download

result = maap.submitJob(
    identifier="<DESCRIPTION>",
    algo_id="gedi-subset_ubuntu",
    version="<VERSION>",
    queue="maap-dps-worker-8gb",
    username="<USERNAME>",  # Your Earthdata Login username
    aoi=aoi,
    limit=limit,
)

print(result["job_id"])
```

Using the value of `result["job_id"]`, you may use the **DPS/MAS Operations**
menu for job operations, just as if you had submitted the job from the menu
(rather than programmatically).  Once the job status is **Succeeded**, you must
obtain the jobs result (**Get DPS Job Result**), which should display 3 URLs,
with the first URL of the following form:

```plain
http://.../<USERNAME>/dps_output/gedi-subset_ubuntu/<VERSION>/<DATETIME_PATH>
```

Based upon this URL, the `gedi_subset.gpkg` file generated by the job should be
available at the following path within the ADE:

```plain
~/my-private-bucket/dps_output/gedi-subset_ubuntu/<VERSION>/<DATETIME_PATH>/gedi_subset.gpkg
```

## Getting the GeoJSON URL for a geoBoundary

If your AOI is a geoBoundary (such as a country), you may obtain the URL for its
GeoJSON file from the [geoBoundaries] website, rather than constructing a custom
GeoJSON file.  To obtain the URL for the GeoJSON of an AOI, obtain the ISO3 code
and level for the AOI's geoBoundary from the website.

Once you know the ISO3 code and level, construct a [geoBoundaries API] URL
(this is _not_ the GeoJSON URL) of the following form, replacing `<ISO3>` and
`<LEVEL>` with appropriate values:

```plain
https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/<ISO3>/<LEVEL>/
```

For example, the ISO3 code for Gabon is GAB.  Therefore, the geoBoundaries API
URL for Gabon level 0 is
<https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/>.

You may use the geoBoundaries API URL in various ways to obtain your AOI's
GeoJSON URL, such as one of the following:

- Use a browser to navigate to the API URL.  If your browser directly displays
  the result, locate the value of `"gjDownloadURL"`.  If your browser forces
  you to download the result, do so, and locate the value of `"gjDownloadURL"`
  within the downloaded file.  In either case, the value associated with
  `"gjDownloadURL"` is your AOI's GeoJSON URL.

- Alternatively, open a terminal window and run the following command,
  replacing `<API_URL>` appropriately.  The output should be the GeoJSON URL:

  ```sh
  curl -s <API_URL> | tr ',' '\n' | grep "gjDownloadURL.*gbOpen" | sed -E 's/.*"(https.+)"/\1/'
  ```

Continuing with the Gabon example, entering the geoBoundaries API URL for Gabon
(shown above) in a browser should result in the following (abridged) output
(either in the browser, or within a downloaded file):

```plain
{
  "boundaryID": "GAB-ADM0-25889322",
  "boundaryName": "Gabon",
  "boundaryISO": "GAB",
  ...
  "gjDownloadURL": "https://github.com/wmgeolab/geoBoundaries/raw/9f8c9e0f3aa13c5d07efaf10a829e3be024973fa/releaseData/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/geoBoundaries-GAB-ADM0.geojson",
  ...
  "gbHumanitarian": {
    ...
  }
}
```

Alternatively, using `curl` from the terminal should also yield the same GeoJSON URL:

```bash
$ curl -s https://www.geoboundaries.org/api/current/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/ | tr ',' '\n' | grep "gjDownloadURL.*gbOpen" | sed -E 's/.*"(https.+)"/\1/'
https://github.com/wmgeolab/geoBoundaries/raw/9f8c9e0f3aa13c5d07efaf10a829e3be024973fa/releaseData/gbOpen/GAB/ADM0/geoBoundaries-GAB-ADM0.geojson
```

You may use this GeoJSON URL for the `aoi` input when running the GEDI
subsetting DPS job.

## Contributing

### Repository Setup

To contribute to this work, you must obtain access to the following:

1. [MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitHub]: For creating new versions
   (releases) of the algorithms implemented in the repository.
1. [MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitLab]: A copy of the GitHub
   repository, in order to enable registering new versions of the algorithms
   from within the ADE (which currently only supports GitLab repositories).
1. [NASA MAAP]: Where the ADE resides, and thus where algorithms can be
   registered (from GitLab repositories).

To prepare for contributing, do the following in an ADE workspace:

1. Clone the GitHub repository.
1. Change directory to the cloned repository.
1. Add the GitLab repository as another remote (named `ade` here, but you may
   specify a different name for the remote):

   ```bash
   git remote add --tags -f ade https://repo.ops.maap-project.org/data-team/maap-documentation-examples.git
   ```

If you plan to do any development work outside of the ADE (such as on your
local workstation), perform the steps above in that location as well.

During development, you will create PRs against the GitHub repository, as
explained below.

### Creating an Algorithm Release

1. Create a new branch based on an appropriate existing branch (typically based
   on `main`).
1. In addition to your desired code and/or configuration changes, do the
   following:
   1. Update `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yaml` according to the
      versioning convention referenced in the [Changelog](./CHANGELOG.md).
   1. Add appropriate entries to the [Changelog](./CHANGELOG.md), according to
      the Changelog convention referenced in the file.  In particular, you
      should add a new section using the same version as specified in
      `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yaml`, with appropriate subsections.
1. Submit a PR to the GitHub repository.
1. _Only when_ the PR is on a branch to be merged into the `main` branch _and_
   it has been approved and merged, create a new release in GitHub as follows:
   1. Go to
      <https://github.com/MAAP-Project/maap-documentation-examples/releases/new>
   1. Click the **Choose a tag** dropdown.
   1. In the input box that appears, enter the _same_ value as the new value of
      `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yml`, and click the **Create a
      new tag** label that appears immediately below the input box.
   1. In the **Release title** input, also enter the _same_ value as the new
      value of `version` in `gedi-subset/algorithm_config.yml`.
   1. In the description text box, copy and paste from the Changelog file only
      the _new version section_ you added earlier to the Changelog.
   1. Click the **Publish release** button.

### Registering an Algorithm Release

Once a release is published in the GitHub repository (see above), the code from
the GitHub repository must be pushed to the GitLab repository in order to be
able to register the new version of the algorithm, as follows, within the ADE:

1. Open a Terminal tab (if necessary) and change directory to the repository.
1. Pull the latest code from GitHub (to obtain merged PR, if necessary):

   ```bash
   git pull origin
   git checkout main
   ```

1. Push the latest code to GitLab (replace `ade` with the appropriate remote
   name, if you didn't use `ade` earlier):

   ```bash
   git push --all ade
   ```

1. In the ADE's File Browser, navigate to
   `maap-documentation-examples/gedi-subset`.
1. Right-click on `algorithm_config.yaml` and choose **Register as MAS
   Algorithm** from the context menu.
1. Confirm that the value of the **version** field matches the GitHub release
   version you created above.  If not, click **Cancel** and review earlier
   steps.  If so, click **Ok**, which will trigger a build job that will take
   several minutes.
1. Check the build job status at
   <https://repo.ops.maap-project.org/root/register-job/-/jobs>.  If the job
   fails, you will need to correct the issue (and likely create a patch release,
   following the release steps again).  Otherwise, you should now be able to
   open the **DPS/MAS Operations** menu, choose **Execute DPS Job**, and find
   the new version of the algorithm in the dropdown list for confirmation.

## Citations

Country Boundaries from:

Runfola, D. et al. (2020) geoBoundaries: A global database of political administrative boundaries. PLoS ONE 15(4): e0231866. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231866>

[geoBoundaries]:
  https://www.geoboundaries.org
[geoBoundaries API]:
  https://www.geoboundaries.org/api.html
[MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitHub]:
  https://github.com/MAAP-Project/maap-documentation-examples.git
[MAAP Documentation Examples hosted on GitLab]:
  https://repo.ops.maap-project.org/data-team/maap-documentation-examples.git
[NASA MAAP]:
  https://ops.maap-project.org/
